In this video, we are going to discuss the
situation when variables are correlated.
The correlation between two independent
variables is zero or nearly zero.
And this is why we say that independent
variables are not correlated.
The flight overbooking example that we
have been analyzing has two sources of
uncertainty.
Demand and number of booked passengers
that show up for their flights.
We have been treating these variables
as independent of each other.
That is, in our model,
the demand values are generated
independently of the show-up values.
This could very well reflect how
things are in the real system.
However, there is an easy way of checking
whether these two
variables are independent.
We just need to calculate
their correlation.
So let's do it.
Open the Excel file
Flight Overbooking Data,
which contains two years of data for the
flight that we have been using as example.
We would like to determine whether demand
and show-up rate are independent or not.
In cell D4, let's type Correlation.
In cell H4, we enter the correlation
function C-O-R-R-E-L,
which goes from b2:b731,e2:e731.
This function returns a correlation
between the variable demand and
the variable rate.
The result is a correlation of almost 0.7.
Without going into details of how
correlation values are calculated,
we know that they can vary from -1 and 1.
As I mentioned earlier, for independent
variables, the correlation is near 0.
So a value of 0.7 indicates
a large positive correlation.
Positive correlation in our example
means that when demand is high,
the show-up rate is also high.
We can think of these variables as
pointing in the same direction.
This analysis tells us that our simulation
model can be improved to reflect
more of what is really happening
in our flight overbooking problem.
Adding correlation coefficients
between uncertain variables is fairly
straightforward.
So let's go ahead and do it.
Locate and open the Excel file
Flight Overbooking Output.
This file has the complete simulation
model of the flight overbooking problem.
The uncertain variables
are in cells B14 and B17.
B14 contains the psi Poisson
function that simulates a demand.
B17 contains the psi binomial function
that simulates the number of passengers
that show up for the flight.
At the moment, there is nothing that
links the way the values are simulated
in both of these cells.
Click on the Analytic Solver Platform tab.
Click on the Correlations tool that is
located in the Simulation Model group.
We want to create a new
correlation matrix.
The right panel shows the two
uncertain variables in our model.
Since we want to include
both of them in the matrix,
we click on the double-arrow button
that is pointing to the right.
The matrix is created with
a default correlation of 0.
We change the correlation
value from 0 to 0.7.
For the name, let's just type Demand and
show up rate.
And for location,
enter e4 and click on Save.
In the second video of this module,
we worked on the problem of finding
an overbooking policy that
will result in a probability
of a least 95% that the number of
bumped passengers is no more than two.
We found that an overbooking of
nine accomplishes this goal.
However, remember that our analysis
was done with a model without correlation
between demand and show-up rate.
To see the results change now that we
have added our correlation matrix,
let's do the following.
First click on the simulation
bulb to turn it on.
Also verify that the number of
simulation trials is set to 10,000.
Then click on the green play
button to run the simulation.
Double-click on B20 to open the empirical
distribution of bumped passengers
that the simulation created.
Set the lower marker at 2 and observe
that the probability of no more than
two bumped passengers is not quite 95%.
It's close, but
under the desired limit we can verify that
without correlations
the probability exceeds 95%.
This is done by clicking on
the Correlations tool and
on checking the Use Correlations option.
The probability changes to 95.88%.
Therefore, to be sure that
the policy side is bad and
taking into consideration that the two
sources of uncertainty are correlated,
we need to consider a policy
with a lower overbooking limit.
Let's use correlations again, by checking
that option in the Correlations tool.
And then let's change
the overbooking limit to 8.
The probability is now 97.44%,
and the number of bumped passengers
does not exceed the desired limit of 2.
Correlations between uncertain
variables are important and
should be carefully examined.
As we saw in our flight
overbooking example,
adding a correlation between two sources
of uncertainty could change the results.
My recommendation is that you always
include correlation analysis in
the process of building
a simulation model.